          REFLECT, CONNECT, PROJECT
A ROUTINE TO REFLECT BACK AND THINK OF FUTURE DIRECTIONS
               FOR LEARNING AND MAKING.




Choose a Making Move you’ve been working with,
     or have seen in action, and consider…
       Reflect
       What stood out to you as you used this Making Move, or watched a
       classmate or friend use it? Why do you think this Making Move might
       be important for learning?

             Connect
             How could this Making Move connect to things you are
             learning or doing outside this class or learning experience?

                   Project
                   How might you use this Making Move differently in the
                   future? What’s another Making Move that you’re
                   inspired to use as your work goes forward?




                        Agency by Design | www.agencybydesign.org
                  Project Zero | Harvard Graduate School of Education
Reflect, Connect, Project

What Kind of Thinking Does This Routine Encourage?
This thinking routine helps learners to think in the past, present, and future, viewing their
making in the context of a long-term and broad trajectory of learning. It is meant to
cultivate an ongoing reflective practice in the classroom or other maker-centered
learning context.

When and How Can This Routine Be Used?
This routine is meant to be used within classrooms and other learning environments that
have an active and ongoing dialogue around the Agency by Design Making Moves. It
can be used when thinking about any of the Making Moves. Learners might use this
routine to reflect on their own use of a Making Move, or to reflect on a peer’s use of a
Making Move. The routine can be used on its own, or in combination with another
routine or other tools related to the Agency by Design framework. Here are some ideas
and considerations for putting this thinking routine into practice:

   •   The three elements of this routine can be introduced to learners all at once or
       one at a time.
   •   You may find that in the beginning, it is helpful to distinguish for learners the
       difference between the use of the word project as a noun (as in a multi-stage
       task that unfolds over time) and its use as a verb (as in look forward), which is the
       third part of this routine. This, and other language in this routine and in the
       Making Moves, should always be adapted to best fit the needs of your learners
       and your context.
   •   As with all routines, it is helpful to use the language of the routine early and often
       in order to help learners internalize the mental moves it encourages.
   •   You might use the language of this routine to make students’ thinking visible by
       incorporating it into concept map prompts, group conversation structures,
       personal journal-writing, etc.
   •   You could hang this routine up in the learning space in order to encourage the
       language of the routine to be used in teaching, learning, and reflection on an
       ongoing basis.




                                  Agency by Design | www.agencybydesign.org
                            Project Zero | Harvard Graduate School of Education
