                                              A THINKING ROUTINE FROM PROJECT ZERO, HARVARD GRADUATE SCHOOL OF EDUCATION


                                                                        Chalk Talk
                     A routine for silently considering ideas, questions, or problems and responding to others.


        Looking at the topical question written on the chart paper:

        •      What ideas come to mind when you consider this idea, question, or problem?
        •      What connections can you make to the others’ responses?
        •      What questions arise as you think about the ideas and consider the responses and
               comments of others?



Purpose: What kind of thinking does this routine encourage?
This routine asks learners to consider ideas, questions, or problems by silently responding in writing both to the prompt
and the thoughts of others. This “silent conversation” provides learners with time to follow through thoughts without
interruption by choosing when they are ready to consider other points of view and make comments.

Application: When and where can I use it?
This routine highlights the notion of building understanding in a collaborative way through putting forward ideas,
questioning one another, and developing the ideas further. Since individuals are asked to sign their comments, there is
a degree of an anonymity that will free up some learners to take more risk and offer ideas. This activity can also be used
for reflection.

Launch: What are some tips for starting and using this routine?
1.   Set up. Write (above) prompt on a large sheet of chart paper and place on tables around room. Have markers
     available. Decide if you wish to assign students to groups or allow them to move freely around the room.
2.   Present the Chalk Talk prompt. Invite learners to think about their reactions to the prompt and record the ideas
     and questions. Encourage learners to read and to add to each other’s responses with additional comments and
     questions.
3.   Circulate. Provide time for learners to circulate around the Chalk Talk paper, reading and adding to the prompts
     and responses as they build. If working in groups you may want them to stay with one recording sheet for 5 min. to
     allow conversation to develop. Groups can then rotate en masse to another group’s paper, silently reading what is
     written there, and adding their reactions and questions to the paper.
4.   Facilitate. May need to prompt the group about the types of responses they can make as they read: connecting
     ideas, elaborating on others’ ideas, commenting on what others have written, asking others to respond with more
     detail, and so on.
5.   Share the thinking. If people have rotated as a group, allow them to return to their original starting places to read
     what others have written on “their” Chalk Talk paper. Ask the group what themes they noticed emerging. What did
     they see as common issues and reactions? What questions surprise them? Debrief the process itself, asking the
     group how their thinking developed during the Chalk Talk process.

                                               Important to monitor the time and keep group appraised of the time.
                                                    This routine is adapted from Hilton Smith of the Foxfire Fund.




                          Share your experience with this thinking routine on social media using the hashtags #PZThinkingRoutines and #ChalkTalk.


                                                                                                           This routine was adapted as part of the Cultures of Thinking project
                                                                                                           at Project Zero, Harvard Graduate School of Education.
       HARVARD GRADUATE SCHOOL OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                           Explore more Thinking Routines at pz.harvard.edu/thinking-routines
                                                               Project Zero adapted this routine from Hilton Smith of the Foxfire Fund.
