                                                        A THINKING ROUTINE FROM PROJECT ZERO, HARVARD GRADUATE SCHOOL OF EDUCATION


                                                                               Circles of Action
                                    A routine for organizing one’s understanding of a topic through concept mapping.


                                                                                             What can I do to contribute...

                                                         In my inner circle (of friends, family, the people I know)?
                                                         In my community (my school, my neighborhood)?
                                                         In the world (beyond my immediate environment)?


   Purpose: What kind of thinking does this routine encourage?
   This routine fosters students’ disposition and motivation to take action in personal, local, and global spheres
   and prepares them to weigh courses of action and their consequences.

   Application: When and where can I use it?
   This routine can help students to develop their sensitivity to opportunities to influence their environments,
   their capacity to do so in effective, informed, and responsible ways, and their motivation to take actions
   over time. When students learn about the world and feel inclined to make a difference, they can feel
   overwhelmed by the magnitude of issues like climate change, transnational consumption, or human rights
   violations. A mismatch between calls for global citizenship and students’ perceptions of their own capacity
   to act can stifle motivation to engage. This routine helps students learn to recognize that actions can have
   multiple scopes (small-big) and occur in multiple spheres (personal-local-global). This routine can be used
   across disciplines (e.g., geography, science, literature, economics) and with a broad range of resources
   (e.g., films, narratives, photographs) typically addressing a conflict, problem, system, or design that can be
   improved through participation and engagement. This routine can also be used informally in daily school
   contexts and interactions in which students have the opportunity to change a situation or help to solve a
   problem (e.g., a conflict among friends, consumption patterns in the school or community, the integration of
   immigrant students). This routine works best when students have a moderate understanding of the issue,
   are primed to care about it, and have a sense of urgency or see the need for a response. This routine can
   be particularly effective when students sense the need but are having difficulty considering viable paths for
   action.

   Launch: What are some tips for starting and using this routine?
   You or your students might begin with a particular issue in mind, or you might involve students in selecting
   a topic through brainstorming issues that are concerning them and that they think require solutions. This
   routine invites students to map possibilities for action, so prior to the discussion, prepare a way for you or
   the students to document their responses. Typically, the “map” involves three concentric circles. You might
   draw these concentric circles (typically labeled inner, community, and world) on the board (for a whole class
   discussion) or invite small groups of students to draw them on large pieces of paper. Once students have
   had a chance (either as a whole group or in small groups) to brainstorm possible contributions at each of
   the levels (note that the order of questions can be inverted if necessary), you might invite the whole class
   to discuss: What are the barriers to students’ capacity to take action at various levels? Drawing on a rich
   initial actions map, students may be invited to consider factors such as ethics, viability, personal interest, and
   potential impact as they decide what to do next.

                                Share your experience with this thinking routine on social media using the hashtags #PZThinkingRoutines and #CirclesOfAction.




                                                                                                            PZ
                                                                                                                                This thinking routine was developed as part of the Id Global & PZ Connect
                                                                                                                                projects at Project Zero, Harvard Graduate School of Education.
               HARVARD GRADUATE SCHOOL OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                           CONNECT              Explore more Thinking Routines at pz.harvard.edu/thinking-routines
© 2022 President and Fellows of Harvard College and Project Zero. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License (CC BY-NC-ND). This license allows users to share this work
with others, but it cannot be used commercially. To reference this work, please use the following: The Circles of Action thinking routine was developed by Project Zero, a research center at the Harvard Graduate School of Education.
