                                                        A THINKING ROUTINE FROM PROJECT ZERO, HARVARD GRADUATE SCHOOL OF EDUCATION


                                                           Creative Question Starts
                  1. Brainstorm at least 12 questions about the topic, concept,                                                                                    Creative Question Starts
                     artwork or object. Try some of the Creative Question Starts.
                                                                                                                                                              •       Why...?
                  2. Review your list, identify the most interesting questions,                                                                               •       What if...?
                     and select one to discuss.                                                                                                               •       What is the purpose of...?
                                                                                                                                                              •       How would it be different if...?
                  3. Reflect: What new ideas do you have about the topic,                                                                                     •       Suppose that...?
                     concept, artwork, or object that you didn’t have before?                                                                                 •       What if we knew...?
                                                                                                                                                              •       What would change if...?



   Purpose: What kind of thinking does this routine encourage?
   This routine provides practice developing questions that provoke thinking and inquiry. Brainstorming such questions
   helps students explore the complexity, depth, and multi-dimensionality of a topic.

   Application: When and where can I use it?
   Use this routine to expand and deepen students’ thinking, to encourage their curiosity, and to increase their motivation
   to inquire. This routine works well throughout the study of a topic in a variety of ways:
   when introducing a new topic to help students get a sense of the topic’s breadth; in the middle of studying a topic as a
   way to enliven students’ curiosity; and, finally, near the end of studying a topic as a way of showing students how the
   knowledge they have gained helps them to ask more complex questions.

   Launch: What are some tips for starting and using this routine?
   To begin, you might want to ask students what they think makes a good question. Then, when you introduce the
   routine, you can connect to their ideas about what makes good questions and explain that the routine is a tool for
   asking good questions that lead to greater insight. Initially, it may work best to do the routine together as an entire
   group. Once students are familiar with the routine, you can have them work in small groups or even solo. In your
   planning, think about how you would like your students to engage at each step. For example, the students might do
   step 1 as a whole group, step 2 in pairs, and return to the whole group discussion in step 3.

   Start the routine by providing a topic, concept, piece of artwork, or object. Ask them to use the Creative Question
   Starts to generate a list of questions about the topic. Creating the list is worthwhile since it gives students a sense of
   the breadth of a topic and sparks curiosity about it. Exploring the questions further can pique students’ interest and can
   fluidly expand the discussion of the topic. After the students finish generating questions, you may want to select one of
   the questions to investigate further, have a discussion about some of the questions, give students information to read
   about the topic, or explore some of the questions by imaginatively playing out possibilities. Additional ways students
   could explore or investigate their questions (and the topic) include writing a story or essay, drawing a picture, creating a
   play or dialogue, inventing a scenario, conducting an imaginary interview, or conducting a thought experiment.

   The reflection step is an important component of the routine since it allows students to identify new insights and
   ideas about the topic, object, artwork, or concept. Consider documenting students’ questions throughout their study
   of the topic and display the list in a visible place so that students can see how their questions about the topic evolve.
   If students are working individually with the routine, they could write their question lists in a journal. You also could
   create a collage out of students’ individual lists and put it on display.




                           Share your experience with this thinking routine on social media using the hashtags #PZThinkingRoutines and #CreativeQuestionStarts.


                                                                                                                                This thinking routine was developed as part of the Visible Thinking project
                                                                                                                                at Project Zero, Harvard Graduate School of Education.
               HARVARD GRADUATE SCHOOL OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                                                Explore more Thinking Routines at pz.harvard.edu/thinking-routines
© 2022 President and Fellows of Harvard College and Project Zero. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License (CC BY-NC-ND). This license allows users to share this work
with others, but it cannot be used commercially. To reference this work, please use the following: The Creative Question Starts thinking routine was developed by Project Zero, a research center at the Harvard Graduate School of Education.
