Digital Habits Checkup                                         NAME


Student Handout
                                                               DATE



Directions
Respond to the prompts below to explore your digital media habits.
                                                Check

Check and take stock of your digital habits. Keep in mind: Habits can be positive, negative, or both.
Brainstorm and list as many of your habits as you can.




Next, draw (or insert) an emoji next to each habit to show how it makes you feel. If you have mixed
feelings, feel free to note more than one feeling.


                                               Choose

Choose one digital habit you want to change or try to do differently. Why is it important that you
change this habit?




                                                           Shareable with attribution for noncommercial use.
                                                                                                               1
Digital Habits Checkup                                          NAME


Student Handout
                                                                DATE



                                               Challenge

Challenge yourself. Make a plan for how you would like to change your habit. Consider when you will
do something different and what you can do instead. (When we're trying to change a habit, it's not
enough just to say what we won't do. We also have to come up with something to do instead!)




                                                 Boost

Boost your challenge. What are some ways you can give your new habit a "boost" and make it easier
to do? If you're trying to break a bad habit, what are some things you can do so you don't slip back into
old ways? (Examples: Turn off notifications or set "Do Not Disturb" mode during certain hours, tell my
friends I won't be available during certain times, put my phone out of sight in a backpack, etc.).




                                                 Track

Track your journey. Keep track of your progress. Each day answer two questions:
   ● How's it going with your challenge today?
   ● What made your challenge hard or easy today?




                                                            Shareable with attribution for noncommercial use.
                                                                                                                2
