                                                        A THINKING ROUTINE FROM PROJECT ZERO, HARVARD GRADUATE SCHOOL OF EDUCATION


                                                                                  Facts or Fiction
                                      A routine to increase awareness of the many issues of truth and what to consider
                                                           when exploring the truth of something.

                                                  Select a news item, an image, something that has happened to you,
                                                                    or an event in history and ask:
                 What do you perceive is being conveyed by this?
                 Who would decide to convey this message? Why?
                 How else could this be interpreted?
                 What do you believe is true in this? What makes you think that?


   Purpose: What kind of thinking does this routine encourage?
   Too often, information can be accepted at face value without any supporting evidence. This routine is designed to
   explore the complexity of the realm of truth. It encourages slow looking, perspective taking, seeking supporting
   evidence, and analysis to uncover the core and accuracy of information. Some questions that might emerge as students
   use the routine are: Is there supporting evidence? Are many facts and figures reported? Does it fit with what you have
   learned before? Never be afraid to ask questions.

   Application: When and where can I use it?
   The routine can be helpful to show students that images or information presented are not always truthful accounts of
   events. One suggestion for doing this is to select an image showing that if only part of it was visible, different ‘truths’
   could be interpreted. Cut the image into separate pieces, show only a part of it at a time as if each piece was a stand-
   alone complete picture, facilitate a discussion on what can be seen and thoughts/interpretations of what is happening,
   and then show the complete image and compare with initial thoughts. Alternately, show only one of a sequence of
   images or read only part of an article initially, discuss it and then complete the sequence.

   Launch: What are some tips for starting and using this routine?
   •       The routine can help awaken students to the idea that facts or fiction within a story, image, report can be
           influenced by the agenda of the photographer, author and/or editor of the information. Identifying possible
           purposes of a message can provide insights into who is “sending” the message. Why do you think this image/story
           was communicated? Who would benefit from this ‘message’ being in the public arena? What impact do you think
           it may have? After giving yourself, your students, or colleagues time to think about this, ask whether your original
           impressions changed. What other messages are being perceived? Circle of Viewpoints and Step Inside Thinking
           Routines could also assist in discussions throughout this routine and highlight different perspectives of the same
           information/image.
   •       Students often ask “What are the facts” and “Can there be more than one truth?” From a definitional standpoint,
           in the end there cannot be more than one truth on a particular point, e.g. either smoking doesn’t cause cancer or
           it does (more precisely, heavy patterns of smoking increase the chances of cancer to such-and-such a degree). But
           there’s a big catch to this: what’s really true and what we entirely reasonably think is true at the moment are quite
           different things. What we now reasonably think is true sometimes turns out to be wrong later. Also, at a given point
           in time, different people may take different ideas as true. However, it is important for students to appreciate that
           what we reasonably take as true today may turn out to be wrong later; disagreements about what’s true are normal
           and sorting out evidence is often a challenging and complex long-term endeavor.


                                Share your experience with this thinking routine on social media using the hashtags #PZThinkingRoutines and #FactsOrFiction.




               HARVARD GRADUATE SCHOOL OF EDUCATION
                                                                            PZ
                                                                           CONNECT
                                                                                                        This thinking routine was developed by Project Zero at the Harvard Graduate School of Education
                                                                                                        as part of the PZ Connect project with generous support from Independent Schools Victoria (AU).
                                                                                                        Explore more Thinking Routines at pz.harvard.edu/thinking-routines
© 2019 President and Fellows of Harvard College and Project Zero. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License (CC BY-NC-ND). This license allows users to share this work
with others, but it cannot be used commercially. To reference this work, please use the following: The Facts or Fiction thinking routine was developed by Project Zero, a research center at the Harvard Graduate School of Education.
