Feelings and Options                                            NAME


Student Handout
                                                                DATE



Directions
Read the dilemma below and then complete the Feelings and Options steps.
                                   (Insert dilemma name here.)

(Insert dilemma here.)




Identify: Who are the different people involved in the scenario? What dilemma or challenge are
they facing?




Feel: What do you think each person in the dilemma is feeling? Why might the situation be hard or
challenging for each of them?




                                                           Shareable with attribution for noncommercial use.
                                                                                                               1
Feelings and Options                                               NAME


Student Handout
                                                                   DATE



Imagine: Imagine options for how the situation could be handled. Come up with as many ideas as
possible. There's no one "right" answer! Then, highlight which option might lead to the most positive
outcome, where most people feel good or taken care of.




Say: Thinking more about the idea you chose for handling the situation. What could the people involved
say?

First: How would they say it?

     In person                             Call or FaceTime                     Text


     Direct/private message                Email                                Other:



Second: What would they say? Write out the conversation.




                                           Complicate (optional)

Discuss these questions in your group, and share responses. Be sure to hear all perspectives—the
more perspectives, the better!
   ● (Insert complicate questions here.)




                                                              Shareable with attribution for noncommercial use.
                                                                                                                  2
