                                                        A THINKING ROUTINE FROM PROJECT ZERO, HARVARD GRADUATE SCHOOL OF EDUCATION


                                                                                               Outside In
                                                               A routine for connecting personal interests to topics in school.


                         1. List some of your hobbies or interests here . . . . . . & . . . . . . List some of your school topics or subjects here.




                 2. Connect a line between one of your hobbies/interests and a school topic. Along the line, write down a possible
                 connection between the two. Do the same thing again with another interest and topic (the interest can connect to
                 the same topic, or a different one).
                3. Imagine what you could do to investigate or expand each of the connections further.
                         Connection #1: Possible investigation or expansion                                                      Connection #2: Possible investigation or expansion




    Launch: What are some tips for starting and using this routine?
    How can I help students make outside-in connections (and should I worry if the connections seem superficial)? At the broadest level, a
    connection is any type of relationship or association between two or more things. There is plenty of room for creativity, because
    connections can be metaphorical as well as literal. One way to help students find connections is to suggest that they look for
    certain types of connections. For example, they can look for connections related to form (e.g., how things are shaped physically or
    conceptually, what they look like, what things are made out of or what materials they use or involve); structure (e.g., how things are
    organized, how they work as a system), stories (e.g., the stories things tell or are told about them, or how things evolved over time,);
    defining ideas (e.g., main themes, definitions, key concepts); learning (e.g., how people learn about them, the learning challenges they
    involve); and culture (e.g., the customs and traditions people associate with them, the significance they have for groups of people).
    Don’t worry if students make connections that at first seem broad or superficial. Most connections get more interesting once you
    spend some time thinking about them, and the ‘imagine’ step of the routine gives students an opportunity to dig into a connection
    and explore its depth. For example, a student might make a connection between her dance lessons and science class in school by
    saying that dance involves the human body and the human body is a topic in science. On the face of it, this may seem like quite a
    broad connection. But, as the answer to the next question illustrates, with a bit of expansion it can become quite interesting.

    How can I help students imagine how to investigate the connections they make? A good way to start is to encourage students to
    brainstorm several questions about their connections. For instance, to continue with the foregoing example about dance, science,
    and the human body, here are some further questions students could ask. How are different systems of the body involved in dance—
    for instance the muscular system or the skeletal system? How is dance itself like a body system? What would it be like to create a
    dance inspired by the firing of neurons in the brain, or by the circulatory system? How does dance affect human health?

    What should students do after they use the routine? Should they follow up on their ideas? There are two possible options. One of
    course is to encourage students to continue to investigate the ideas they came up with. They could do this as a special project, or as
    part of the regular curriculum. But even if there’s no follow-up, just having students seek and expand on connections is worthwhile
    in itself. Why? Because knowledge likes to be activated, and students will find it interesting simply to reach for connections. Also,
    using the routine regularly helps students get in the habit of making connections. Recall the principle mentioned in the introduction
    to the Portable Knowledge materials: What you learn is what you do. Students who make connections frequently as part of the
    learning process are much more likely to continue that connection making later on. Moreover, sometimes school-based learning
    is seen as unconnected to students’ lives outside of school. But learning happens everywhere. By getting in the habit of making
    connections ‘outside-in,’ students begin to see learning as what it truly is—a lifelong, lifewide endeavor.

                                    Share your experience with this thinking routine on social media using the hashtags #PZThinkingRoutines and #OutsideIn.




                                                                                      PZ
                                                                                                                                This thinking routine was developed as part of the PZ Connect project
                                                                                                                                at Project Zero, Harvard Graduate School of Education.
                HARVARD GRADUATE SCHOOL OF EDUCATION
                                                                                      CONNECT                                   Explore more Thinking Routines at pz.harvard.edu/thinking-routines
© 2019 President and Fellows of Harvard College and Project Zero. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License (CC BY-NC-ND). This license allows users to share this work
with others, but it cannot be used commercially. To reference this work, please use the following: The Outside In thinking routine was developed by Project Zero, a research center at the Harvard Graduate School of Education.
