                                                         A THINKING ROUTINE FROM PROJECT ZERO, HARVARD GRADUATE SCHOOL OF EDUCATION


                                                Parts, Purposes, Complexities
                                                                                 A routine for looking closely at systems.

                                                                                       Choose an object or system and ask:

                               What are its parts?
                                      What are its various pieces or components

                               What are its purposes?
                                      What are the purposes of each of these parts?

                               What are its complexities?
                                      How is it complicated in its parts and purposes, the relationship between the 		
                                      two, or in other ways?


    Purpose: What kind of thinking does this routine encourage?
    The routine helps students slow down and make careful, detailed observations by encouraging them to look beyond
    the obvious features of an object or system. The routine stimulates curiosity, raises questions, and surfaces areas for
    further inquiry. The routine is one of three PZ Thinking Routines that begins with the naming of parts. Naming parts
    is an important way of exploring complexity because it reveals how objects and systems have numerous interacting
    components.

    Application: When and where can I use it?
    The routine can be used to explore virtually any object or system. It works particularly well with things that students
    can directly observe or diagram. If you use the routine with an object or system from the natural world, as opposed to a
    human-designed object or system, you may want to substitute the word ‘function’ for ‘purpose. This is because human-
    made objects and systems are made with intentional purposes in mind, whereas in the natural world, form and function
    co-evolve without requiring explicit intentionality.
    How much background knowledge do students need in order to use this routine? If the topic is an object that is physically
    or visible, students may not need a lot of background knowledge. However, if students are working with a system that
    extends beyond what they can observe at the moment—like democracy or recycling—it may be helpful for students to
    have some background knowledge, or to give them an opportunity to reflect on their experiences interacting with that
    particular system.

    Launch: What are some tips for starting and using this routine?
    Should the routine be used all at once, or step-by-step? The three elements of this routine can be introduced all at once,
    but it is often helpful to begin by taking extra time with the parts step, in order to give students plenty of time to make
    detailed observations. (If an object is physically present, students can be encouraged to draw its parts, as a way of
    looking closely.) Once students have taken time with the parts step, the next two steps—purposes and complexities—
    often flow together naturally.
    How can students’ thinking be made visible while using this routine? The routine provides an opportunity to make students’
    thinking visible through creating lists, maps, and drawings of the parts, purposes, complexities of various objects and
    systems. Often students discover linkages between the three steps of the routines and their diagrams can including lots
    of connecting lines and annotations—and even look messy at times. This is generally a good thing, as it is an indication
    that students are discovering the genuine messiness of complexity.
    Can this routine be used with very young students? Yes, though generally for students in preK-4 you may want to lead the
    discussion and make one collective chart or diagram. Also, you may consider swapping out the word complexities for
    more accessible terms, such as puzzles or questions.
                        Share your experience with this thinking routine on social media using the hashtags #PZThinkingRoutines and #PartsPurposesComplexities.




                HARVARD GRADUATE SCHOOL OF EDUCATION
                                                                             PZ
                                                                            CONNECT
                                                                                                          This thinking routine was developed by Project Zero at the Harvard Graduate School of Education
                                                                                                          as part of the PZ Connect project with generous support from Independent Schools Victoria (AU).
                                                                                                          Explore more Thinking Routines at pz.harvard.edu/thinking-routines
© 2019 President and Fellows of Harvard College and Project Zero. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License (CC BY-NC-ND). This license allows users to share this work
with others, but it cannot be used commercially. To reference this work, please use the following: The Parts, Purposes, Complexities thinking routine was developed by Project Zero, a research center at the Harvard Graduate School of Education.
