                                                        A THINKING ROUTINE FROM PROJECT ZERO, HARVARD GRADUATE SCHOOL OF EDUCATION


                                                               Projecting Across Time
           A routine for understanding a topic (e.g. ideas, phenomena, problems) across a broad span of time reaching
                                      backward into the past, and forward into the future.

                              Pick a topic (e.g. tourism; computers; global migration patterns). Then, consider it using the
                                                                   following prompts:

                       Map what you think or already know. What do you know about the topic?

                       Reach back in time. How has the topic played out in different forms / contexts / places over the last
                       10 years? The last 100 years? The last 1000 years?

                       Reach forward in time. How do you think the topic will play out 10 years into the future? 100
                       years? 1000 years?

                       Map how your thinking about the topic has changed. How do you view the topic now?



    Purpose: What kind of thinking does this routine encourage?
    This routine encourages learners to view topics (e.g. ideas, phenomena and problems) from the vantage of a broader timescale,
    than what they have learned from the media, or experienced in their own lifetime. Often, ideas (e.g. childhood; debt; happiness),
    phenomena (e.g. the Internet; migration), or problems (e.g. lack of access to clean water; terrorism), can look very different depending
    on how far back in history or how far forward into the future we look.

    For instance, the idea of “childhood” can seem relatively unproblematic when learners explore it through their own lived experience,
    or even by going two or three generations back to how their parents or grandparents experienced it. Imagine inviting them to go
    even farther back in time, to before the 17th century when “childhood” as an idea did not exist and children worked in the fields
    from a young age. How would that impact the way learners understand what being a child means? Similarly, inviting learners to
    project forward in time to understand the idea of “childhood” requires them to consider the conditions that make “childhood”
    possible or even viable, as well as how what they have come to accept as “childhood” may change dramatically.

    Launch: What are some tips for starting and using this routine?
    What are some tips for the step “Map what you think or already know?” This step is intended to invite learners to make visible what they
    think about the topic. A good way to begin the routine is to have learners map this step on a large chart in one color, and then each
    of the next steps in a different color. That way, at a glance, they can see how their thinking develops with each step.

    What are some tips for the step “Reach back in time?” Here, it may be necessary to circumscribe the problem space for your learners:
    how far back do you want them to go? Is there a particular context(s) you want them to pay attention to? If so, you may want to
    provide resources that will help them explore the topic, e.g. a carefully curated set of websites, articles, books, etc. Where feasible,
    this step also offers the opportunity to teach learners about historical understanding and evidence, e.g. how do we know what we
    know about the past? Whose past is it, and who decides? What evidence has been offered for the conclusions?

    What are some tips for the step “Reach forward in time?” This step should encourage a certain amount of imagination and fantasy
    (especially the farther into the future one reaches for), but not fantastical imaginings that are simply meant to be outrageous. A good
    follow-up is “What makes you say that?” to prompt learners to provide thoughtful reasons to support their responses. Also, learners
    may choose to hedge in their response - “Maybe X, maybe Y, depending” – which is perfectly reasonable.

    What about some other time frames? It’s important that the routine is adapted for your learners, context, and purpose, so if the time
    frame of 10/100/1000 does not work well (e.g. 10 years is too short for any observable change), feel free to choose other time
    frames like 20/100/1000 or even 20/200/2000.


                            Share your experience with this thinking routine on social media using the hashtags #PZThinkingRoutines and #ProjectingAcrossTime.




                                                                                       PZ
                                                                                                                                This thinking routine was developed as part of the PZ Connect project
                                                                                                                                at Project Zero, Harvard Graduate School of Education.
                HARVARD GRADUATE SCHOOL OF EDUCATION
                                                                                      CONNECT                                   Explore more Thinking Routines at pz.harvard.edu/thinking-routines
© 2019 President and Fellows of Harvard College and Project Zero. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License (CC BY-NC-ND). This license allows users to share this work
with others, but it cannot be used commercially. To reference this work, please use the following: The Projecting Across Time thinking routine was developed by Project Zero, a research center at the Harvard Graduate School of Education.
