                                                        A THINKING ROUTINE FROM PROJECT ZERO, HARVARD GRADUATE SCHOOL OF EDUCATION


       Step Inside: Perceive, Know About, Care About
                                                                                 A routine for getting inside viewpoints.


                                                             Three core questions guide students in this routine:

                                                             1. What can the person or thing perceive?
                                                             2. What might the person or thing know about or believe?
                                                             3. What might the person or thing care about?



   Purpose: What kind of thinking does this routine encourage?
   This routine helps students to explore different perspectives and viewpoints as they try to imagine things,
   events, problems, or issues differently. In some cases, this can lead to a more creative understanding of what
   is being studied. For instance, imagining oneself as the numerator in a fraction. In other settings, exploring
   different viewpoints can open up possibilities for further creative exploration. For example, following this
   activity, a student might write a poem from the perspective of a soldier’s sword left on the battlefield.

   Application: When and where can I use it?
   This routine asks students to step inside the role of a character or object—from a picture they are looking at, a
   story they have read, an element in a work of art, a historical event being discussed, and so on—and to imagine
   themselves inside that point of view. Students are asked to then speak or write from that chosen point of view.
   This routine works well when you want students to open up their thinking and look at things differently. It can
   be used as an initial kind of problem-solving brainstorm that opens up a topic, issue, or item. It can also be used
   to help make abstract concepts, pictures, or events come more to life for students.

   Launch: What are some tips for starting and using this routine?
   In getting started with the routine, the teacher might invite students to look at an image and ask them to
   generate a list of the various perspectives or points of view embodied in that picture. Students then choose
   a particular point of view to embody or talk from, saying what they perceive, know about, and care about.
   Sometimes students might state their perspective before talking. Other times, they may not and then the class
   could guess from which perspective they are speaking.
   In their speaking and writing, students may well go beyond these starter questions. Encourage them to take on
   the character of the thing they have chosen and talk about what they are experiencing. Students can improvise
   a brief spoken or written monologue, taking on this point of view, or students can work in pairs with each
   student asking questions that help their partner stay in character and draw out his or her point of view.

   This routine is adapted from Art Works for Schools: A Curriculum for Teaching Thinking In and Through the Arts (2002) DeCordova
   Museum and Sculpture Park, the President and Fellows of Harvard College and the Underground Railway Theater.




                                    Share your experience with this thinking routine on social media using the hashtags #PZThinkingRoutines and #StepInside.


                                                                                                                                 This thinking routine was adapted as part of the Visible Thinking project
                                                                                                                                 at Project Zero, Harvard Graduate School of Education.
                                                                                                                                 Explore more Thinking Routines at pz.harvard.edu/thinking-routines
Project Zero adapted this routine from from Art Works for Schools: A Curriculum for Teaching Thinking In and Through the Arts (2002) DeCordova Museum and Sculpture Park, the President and Fellows of Harvard College and the Underground Railway
Theater.
