                                                        A THINKING ROUTINE FROM PROJECT ZERO, HARVARD GRADUATE SCHOOL OF EDUCATION


                                                                                                      Stories
                                                                  A routine for uncovering accounts of complex issues.


                    Consider how accounts of issues, events, people, society, etc. are presented; what has been left
                                       out, and how might you want to present the account.

                                                                                   What is the story that is presented?
                                                                                    What is the account that is told?
                                                                      What is the untold story?
                                           What is left out in the account? What other angles are missing in the account?
                                                                                 What is your story?
                                                              What is the a ccount that you think should be the one told?

   Purpose: What kind of thinking does this routine encourage?
   This thinking routine invites learners to (1) explore how accounts of issues, events, people, society, etc. are presented;
   (2) tease apart and rethink the various angles, dimensions and scope of accounts; (3) consider what has been left out in
   the account; and (4) take a stand on the kind of account that they would want to hear.

   Application: When and where can I use it?
   It is advisable to use the routine’s prompts in the order they are presented, as the sequence is designed to support
   learners in uncovering how narratives are presented and how they could be re-thought. You may want to use additional
   prompts to target specific goals, such as: To move from a local to a global perspective - “What is a bigger story that this
   story could be connected or related to?” To think about what an individual’s account could be - “What is a smaller story
   that this story could be connected or related to?” To consider how different disciplinary experts might explain or describe
   the issue, event, people, society, etc. - “What is the scientific/historical/ literary/etc. story?” You may also consider
   framing the prompt “What is your story?” as “What is his/her story? What is our story?” when you want learners to explore
   multiple perspectives on the issue, event, people, society, etc., and begin to craft a collective account.

   Launch: What are some tips for starting and using this routine?
   •       The prompt “What is the story?” invites learners to understand how an issue, event, people, society, etc., is
           presented. If the material used with the thinking routine presents more than one perspective, consider dividing the
           learners into groups and assigning them a specific perspective. That way, these different “stories” will flow naturally
           into the next prompt, where different angles and perspectives are brought into the mix.
   •       The prompt “What is the untold story?” invites learners to explore the multiple angles, perspectives and
           dimensions in complex issues, events, people, society, etc., as well as hypothesize the motivations for the account:
           whose account is this? What has been left out? What has been emphasized? What was made less significant?
           Who does this account advantage and disadvantage? In what way is it easy to not pay attention to? Unpack it for
           learners by asking them: what might people not want us to know about the issue, event, people, society, etc., or what do
           people not pay attention to or don’t think about?
   •       The prompt “What is your story?” invites learners to bring their own perspective and aspirations into the topic or
           issue. Unpack the prompt by asking learners: How would you rewrite this story? What perspective would you take and
           why? How would the story ideally be like ‘in a different world’? While it is not intended to be an invitation for learners
           to relate their own experiences, the prompt is still roomy enough for learners to use their lived experiences as a
           basis for what they hope to see happen with the topic or issue, or why their aspiration matters.



                                      Share your experience with this thinking routine on social media using the hashtags #PZThinkingRoutines and #Stories.




               HARVARD GRADUATE SCHOOL OF EDUCATION
                                                                            PZ
                                                                           CONNECT
                                                                                                        This thinking routine was developed by Project Zero at the Harvard Graduate School of Education
                                                                                                        as part of the PZ Connect project with generous support from Independent Schools Victoria (AU).
                                                                                                        Explore more Thinking Routines at pz.harvard.edu/thinking-routines
© 2019 President and Fellows of Harvard College and Project Zero. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License (CC BY-NC-ND). This license allows users to share this work
with others, but it cannot be used commercially. To reference this work, please use the following: The Stories thinking routine was developed by Project Zero, a research center at the Harvard Graduate School of Education.
