                                                         A THINKING ROUTINE FROM PROJECT ZERO, HARVARD GRADUATE SCHOOL OF EDUCATION


                                                      Think, Pair, Share (Adapted)

                                                 Pose a question to students. Give students a few minutes to think.

                                               Invite students to pair with a nearby student to share their thoughts.


    Purpose: What kind of thinking does this routine encourage?
    This routine promotes understanding through active reasoning and explanation. Because students listen to
    and share ideas with others, it also encourages students to understand multiple perspectives.

    Application: When and where can I use it?
    This routine can be used when it would help for students to process their thinking aloud with another
    student. For example, you may ask students to Think, Pair, Share before starting a science experiment, in the
    middle of solving a math problem, after reading a passage of a book, etc. Sharing can also be done in small
    groups.

    Launch: What are some tips for starting and using this routine?
    When first introducing the routine, you may want to remind students to take turns, listen carefully, and
    ask clarifying questions of each other. One way to encourage students to listen actively to each other is to
    tell them that when they have completed their conversations, you will ask some students to explain their
    partner’s thinking. Encourage students to make their thinking visible by asking them to write or draw their
    ideas before and/or after sharing (perhaps in a journal). You may also want to document students’ ideas and
    display them in the learning space. Sometimes it is useful to have pairs or groups summarize their ideas for
    the whole class.




                                 Share your experience with this thinking routine on social media using the hashtags #PZThinkingRoutines and #ThinkPairShare.


                                                                                                                                   This thinking routine was adapted as part of the Visible Thinking project
                                                                                                                                   at Project Zero, Harvard Graduate School of Education.
                HARVARD GRADUATE SCHOOL OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                                                   Explore more Thinking Routines at pz.harvard.edu/thinking-routines
© 2011 President and Fellows of Harvard College. Adapted from Lyman, F. T. (1981). The responsive classroom discussion: The inclusion of all students. In A. Anderson (Ed.), Mainstreaming digest (pp. 109-113). College Park: University of Maryland.
