                                                        A THINKING ROUTINE FROM PROJECT ZERO, HARVARD GRADUATE SCHOOL OF EDUCATION


                                                                                        What Can Be
                                                                     A routine for considering how complexities unfold.

                    Choose something (there are endless possibilities, from objects to systems, human-made or natural,
                     ideas or issues, people and societies or narratives) that affect us and has changed in many ways.

                 Review 		                                       How did it get to be the way it is now? Who/what might have caused or 		
                 			                                             influenced these changes?

                 Predict 		                                      How else might this change in the future?

                 Imagine and Create                              Change always comes with challenges. If you could turn the challenges of 		
                 			                                             these predicted changes into opportunities, what do you imagine could be?
                 			                                             What could be created?

                 Consider how things that have been the same or similar for a long time are changing rapidly in our
                 complex world and despite the unknown, how might we plan to positively shape changes ahead?


   Purpose: What kind of thinking does this routine encourage?
   The only constant in our complex world is change. Change can elicit uncertainty and fear, yet change can also provide
   new opportunities. This routine is designed to encourage exploration of possibilities and to build agency in imagining
   and creating how things could change and what can be.

   Application: When and where can I use it?
   Objects and situations can be accepted as is, status quo. But how else could they be? The “What Can Be” routine
   is designed to encourage the freedom to imagine possibilities. The creative process can involve solving a problem,
   creating an alternative, making something new or an exploration of options. These learning opportunities can include
   using found or available materials that could be discarded, and/or specifically selected materials, and time given for
   imagining how else they could be, to dream, plan and design. New or adapted objects and/or systems can be created
   individually, in groups or as whole class activities.

   Launch: What are some tips for starting and using this routine?
   •       The Review step (seeking to identify how today’s objects, ideas, systems and narratives came about in the first
           place, and what caused changes along the way) can help develop understanding of why beliefs that have been
           held and objects created have changed. This in turn reveals how they might be developed further or new creations
           built on what has been learned from past experiences. Why are schools in so many ways the same as when
           our grandparents were at school? What changes could be made in schools for a better fit for growing up in our
           changing world?
   •       Students may need to be encouraged to take risks with this thinking routine experience. History provides many
           examples of people trying something differently and persevering when things went awry. A fun and engaging way
           to encourage students to think about what can be could be to look at accidental discoveries
   •       How can predictions be made when so much is unknown? The word “predictions” encourages safe risk taking. It is not
           expressing certainty of what will be, rather forecasts, likelihoods and projections, and therefore worth exploring
           what could happen with the aim of providing positive options ahead, or, if predictions are not so positive, giving
           time to seek alternative ways ahead.


                                  Share your experience with this thinking routine on social media using the hashtags #PZThinkingRoutines and #WhatCanBe.




               HARVARD GRADUATE SCHOOL OF EDUCATION
                                                                            PZ
                                                                           CONNECT
                                                                                                        This thinking routine was developed by Project Zero at the Harvard Graduate School of Education
                                                                                                        as part of the PZ Connect project with generous support from Independent Schools Victoria (AU).
                                                                                                        Explore more Thinking Routines at pz.harvard.edu/thinking-routines
© 2019 President and Fellows of Harvard College and Project Zero. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License (CC BY-NC-ND). This license allows users to share this work
with others, but it cannot be used commercially. To reference this work, please use the following: The What Can Be thinking routine was developed by Project Zero, a research center at the Harvard Graduate School of Education.
