                                                        A THINKING ROUTINE FROM PROJECT ZERO, HARVARD GRADUATE SCHOOL OF EDUCATION


                            What Makes You Say That? (Adapted)
                                                                                                      What’s going on?

                                                                           What do you see that makes you say that?



   Purpose: What kind of thinking does this routine encourage?
   This routine cultivates observation, description, explanation-building, and evidence-based reasoning. Because students
   share their interpretations, they are encouraged to see multiple perspectives.

   Application: When and where can I use it?
   Use this routine when you want students to look closely at something and uncover their reasoning about the way it
   works, how it came to be, or why it is the way it is. For example, you can use this routine when students are looking
   at works of art or historical artifacts, reading poetry, making scientific observations and hypotheses, or delving into
   broad conceptual topics like culture, change, or creativity. It also is useful for gathering information on students’ prior
   understandings when introducing a new topic.

   Launch: What are some tips for starting and using this routine?
   To use this routine effectively, it is important to pay attention to the flow of classroom discussion, considering where in
   that flow the routine could help students expound on their reasoning. For example, listen for students giving opinions,
   making assumptions, or offering interpretations about a topic and consider inserting the question, What makes you say
   that? As you are planning lessons, you also may be able to anticipate the moments when using this routine will deepen
   the discussion and help students explore what’s underneath their thoughts and assertions.

   Asking What makes you say that? models for students the type of thinking that you want them to develop. Over time,
   students may internalize the routine and begin to support their interpretations with evidence without being asked.

   Document student responses in a way that maintains the flow of the conversation. Consider recording class
   discussions, keeping an ongoing list of explanations, or asking students to document their thinking through sketches,
   drawings, models, or writing. This documentation can be displayed and revisited in the classroom, helping you as well
   as the students to see the development of their thinking.




                           Share your experience with this thinking routine on social media using the hashtags #PZThinkingRoutines and #WhatMakesYouSayThat.


                                                                                                                                 This thinking routine was adapted as part of the Visible Thinking project
                                                                                                                                 at Project Zero, Harvard Graduate School of Education.
                HARVARD GRADUATE SCHOOL OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                                                 Explore more Thinking Routines at pz.harvard.edu/thinking-routines
© 2011 President and Fellows of Harvard College. Adapted from: Yenawine, P. (1998). Visual Art and Student-Centered Discussions. Theory Into Practice, 37(4), 314-321.
