                                                        A THINKING ROUTINE FROM PROJECT ZERO, HARVARD GRADUATE SCHOOL OF EDUCATION


          Who Am I? Explore, Connect, Identify, Belong
                                                                         A routine to explore the complexity of identity.


                       Think about who you are and then about someone else. Consider how you have become who
                                you are, where you belong and what that can mean in our changing world.
                 Explore Who am I? How has my identity developed?

                 Connect I am connected to my parents, their parents and my brother and sister and I’m in the
                         basketball team. Who else and what else am I connected to?
                 Identify If I wanted others to know who I am, what would identify me?
                          Do we have more than one identity?
                 Belong Where do I think I belong? Do I have a sense of belonging to more than one group,
                        more than one place?

    Purpose: What kind of thinking does this routine encourage?
    It is not unusual for people, systems, objects or ideas to be judged or given labels without others really knowing much
    about them. This routine encourages students to reserve judgment, take time to find out more about what they see
    and/or hear, and explore more deeply and broadly other people, and develop greater understanding of similarities and
    differences.

    Application: When and where can I use it?
    Identity can be a sensitive matter in some contexts. As a teacher, you make decisions all the time about what will serve
    your students and your context well. If in your judgment, this routine will not serve your context well, don’t use it! Or
    maybe parts of it would serve well, or some adaptation. This does not mean we should never take up sensitive matters
    in our classes; arguably we should from time to time. But it’s always a judgment call. Other questions that can foster
    further understanding of the ways an individual’s identity is developed include: Does where you, or where your parents
    were born influence your identity? Does the place you live, your school, your friends shape your identity in certain
    ways? What about your religion and/or skin color? What do you think has shaped your identity?

    Launch: What are some tips for starting and using this routine?
    The routine can be introduced and incorporated in one lesson, or in one or more steps over time. The process can be
    planned or shaped in response to discussions it elicits, and depending on the purpose and context in which it is being
    utilized. It can be broken into steps in whichever order is most relevant and time frame that is effective, sometimes
    involving revisiting steps over time.
    • How can similarities, not only differences, be brought into discussions about identity? Students in the same school
         can wear different clothes, eat different foods and celebrate different festivals. Often their identities are shaped by
         their differences, and generalizations are often made that group them with others sharing those attributes. Invite
         students to find similarities they share. Invite them to look for similarities among students who learn differently to
         others, among those who come from different family structures, or those who make very different choices in how
         they spend time away from school, e.g. playing sport, going shopping, playing the saxophone, studying, meeting
         friends, painting, making things, spending time in hospital, staying alone or with family. Often the many similarities
         they discover they share are unexpected.
    • What are some tips for the ‘identify’ step? You could invite students to role play, introducing themselves to each
         other as if meeting for the first time, and ask each other questions that would help them get to know each other
         better. Discuss the multiplicity of identity. Who do people think you are? Can the same person be a sister, a
         daughter, a student, a swimmer, a friend? Where do you think you belong? Is a sense of belonging important?
                                    Share your experience with this thinking routine on social media using the hashtags #PZThinkingRoutines and #WhoAmI?




                HARVARD GRADUATE SCHOOL OF EDUCATION
                                                                             PZ
                                                                            CONNECT
                                                                                                         This thinking routine was developed by Project Zero at the Harvard Graduate School of Education
                                                                                                         as part of the PZ Connect project with generous support from Independent Schools Victoria (AU).
                                                                                                         Explore more Thinking Routines at pz.harvard.edu/thinking-routines
© 2019 President and Fellows of Harvard College and Project Zero. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License (CC BY-NC-ND). This license allows users to share this work
with others, but it cannot be used commercially. To reference this work, please use the following: The Who Am I? thinking routine was developed by Project Zero, a research center at the Harvard Graduate School of Education.
