Thinking Routines Matrix
from Making Thinking Visible by Ron Ritchhart, Karren Morrison & Mark Church.

Zoom In

See-Think-Wonder

Activating prior knowledge, wondering, planning

Describing, inferring, and intrepreting

Describing, interpreting, and wondering

Open-ended discussion on paper. Ensures all voices are heard, gives thinking time.

Good at the beginning of a unit to direct personal or group inquiry and uncover current understandings as well as
misconceptions

Variation of STW involving using only portions of an image

Good with ambiguous or complex visual stimuli

HARVARD GRADUATE SCHOOL OF EDUCATION

Think-Puzzle-Explore
Uncovering prior knowledge and ideas,questioning

Works well when students have prior knowledge but instruction will move it in a new direction; can be done over
extended time like the course of a unit

Notes

Chalk Talk
Activating prior knowledge,questioning, and
connection makingthrough metaphors

Solicits the group’s ideas and reactions to a proposal, plan, or possible decision

Key Thinking Moves

321 Bridge
Decision making and planning, uncovering personal
reactions

Variation of STW that focuses on identifying parts and explaining them in order to build up an understanding of the
whole from its parts and their purposes

Routine

Compass Points
Observing details and building explanations

Routines for Introducing & Exploring Ideas

Explanation Game

The 4 C’s

Generate-Sort-ConnectElaborate: Concept Maps

CSI: Color, Symbol, Image

Headlines

Focusing attention, analyzing, and reflecting

Connection making, identifying key concept, raising
questions, and considering implications

Uncovering and organizing prior knowledge to
identify connections

Capturing the heart through metaphors

Summarizing, capturing the heart

Used to help learners reflect on how their thinking has shifted and changed over time

Can be combined with other routines and used to prompt reflection and discussion

A text-based routine that helps identifies key points of complex text for discussion; demands a rich text or book

Highlights the thinking steps of making an effective concept map that both organizes and reveals one’s thinking

Nonverbal routine that forces visual connections

Quick summaries of the big ideas or what stands out

Micro Lab
Reflecting and metacognition

Routines for Synthesizing & Organizing Ideas

I used to think

Claim Support Question

Red Light, Yellow Light

Step Inside

Circle of Viewpoints

What makes you say
that?

Perspective taking, reasoning, identifying
complexities

Identifying generalizations and theories, reasoning
with evidence, making counter arguments

Monitoring, identifying of bias, raising questions

Perspective taking

Perspective taking

Reasoning with evidence

Text-based protocol aimed at eliciting what a reader found important or worthwhile; used with discussion to look at
themes and implications.

Identifying and building both sides of an argument or tension/dilemma

Can be used with text or as a basic structure for mathematical and scientific thinking

Used to identify possible errors in reasoning, over-reaching by authors, orareas that need to be questioned

Stepping into a position and talking or writing from that perspective to gain a deeper understanding of it

Identification of perspectives around an issue or problem

A question that teachers can weave into discussion to push students to give evidence for their assertions

Tug of War

Summarizing and distilling

Routines for Digging Deeper into Ideas

Word-Phrase-Sentence

Ritchhart, R., Church, M. & Morrison, K. (2011). Making thinking visible: How to promote engagement, understanding, and independence for all learners. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. (p. 51-52).

Explore more Thinking Routines at pz.harvard.edu/thinking-routines. Find more Thinking Routines and application strategies in the Making Thinking Visible and The Power of Making Thinking Visible books.

